High in this video we're going to take a look at integer constructors and we'll also discuss numerical
bases like base to base 16.
Those kinds of things and we'll do this video in two parts.
It's gets a little long.
So in this bubble do the theoretical parts of the video and then the second video will switch to the
code OK.
So an integer is really just an object.
Like everything else in Python and an integer is an instance of the entire class.
So an end class being a class provides constructors and we have two constructors in the class one constructor
takes a single parameter and that parameter should be a numerical value.
So something like a float or a decimal or a fraction things like that or even an integer.
And then the second constructor takes a string and a second optional parameters.
And I will discuss that in a minute.
So obviously we can call the constructor this way we can say equals int 10.
So we passed 10 into the constructor that's an end and that will result in a being equal to ten.
So we generally don't call it this way we just say a equals 10.
Right we use the literal expression instead.
Obviously we can pass in negative numbers.
That works just fine.
Now we can pass and other than miracle data types So for example if we pass in a float.
OK so a equals a ten point nine.
Well what happens is that we're going to lose some information right.
Ten point nine we cannot convert that without data loss into an integer.
And what happens is that it gets truncated only the integer portion is retained.
And everything after the decimal point is tossed up.
So in this case a would be actually equal to 10.
Same thing of a negative number we get a truncation and so we end up with negative 10.
So this is the truncation not a flaw as we saw in some earlier videos.
This is truncation.
Now we'll discuss that in more detail in the videos on floats and we'll look at alternative ways of
converting floats to integers because you may want to you know instead of having ten point nine maybe
you want to say hey if I convert ten point five to an ant I wanted to be 11.
I want to round up right.
So we'll look at that in more detail.
Now booleans are actually integral numerical types.
You remember when we look at the python hierarchy in an earlier video of booleans are also numbers.
So true will actually be equal to 1 when we do it of true we pass true into the constructor then a will
be equal to 1 and FALSE will be 0.
And again we'll look at to that in a lot more detail in the videos on booleans.
Also we can pass in decimals we can pass and fractions and song.
So if we take into decimal ten point nine will the same thing's going to happen.
We're going to have a loss of data.
It's going to do a truncation and we'll end up with the integer 10.
OK so you can pass in your variable types into the constructor.
But the second constructor takes in a string.
Now the string has to be possible into a number.
Right.
So if you try and pass in a string that can't be passed into a number while that's going to be a problem
you probably wouldn't know what it is either and Python certainly is not going to know.
So we can do something like this.
A equals.
End of the string 10.
Now you'll notice 10 is just to us when we look at that.
What's the number 10 and Python can actually interpret it that way.
And so we end up with a being equal to the integer type.
But what's more interesting is that you can actually specify the base of the number in your string.
So you might think that trying to convert the string a b c to an integer isn't going to work.
While it can if we're working in base 16 for example we know that the digits in the hex system go from
0 through F right zero for nine and a through F..
That's what we use to encode 10 11 12 13 14 and 15 a b c d f.
So if we could specify that to Python then we could actually encode a number like ABC if we could tell
Python hey this number is in base 16 and so we can do that.
So let's take a look first at what happens when we say end of the string.
One two three it ends up saying this is one to three base ten right.
This is what we get when we say into one two three as a string.
We get back a 123 and you know Python and you know shows us numbers in base ten.
So when used with a string there is an optional second parameter called base.
And this is where you can specify the base of the number that you're providing in the string.
And the base has to be between 2 and 36 and we'll see why in just a few seconds if the base is not specified
that it defaults to 10 which is why in this example when we said end of string one to three we obtained
123 base 10.
Right because it defaulted to saying OK you mean base 10 because you didn't specify a base but we can
specify the base.
So in this example here we can say End of 1 0 1 0 the string 1 0 1 0 and base 2.
So now we're telling the python constructor hey this string here is a base to numbers.
And so when it takes that in and then if we print out that integer Python will print out the decimal
equivalent of that integer.
It will print Tenna because 1 0 1 0 base 2 is the same thing as ten in base 10.
Right so we're not really converting the number we're just changing its base representation but still
the same number.
Right now we don't have to say we don't have to put the two just by itself here we can use a key value
argument so we can say string 1 0 1 0 comma base equals 2.
I personally prefer using that because it gets more explicit in terms of what base we're using.
And it's very clear when I'm reading the code that or I've got a different base here.
This is not a default of base 10.
And so that will result in the same thing.
Right 1 0 1 0 and base 2 is 10 in base 10.
Now we can use also letters as long as we go beyond base 10.
So if we base 16 the valid letters would be a through F..
So this is actually quite correct.
It will work.
And so a 1 to F and base 16 is the same thing as 4 1 2 6 3 in base 10.
And the case of these letters doesn't matter.
You can use uppercase or lowercase So this would work just as well.
All right we'll get the same number.
It's not case sensitive.
So Python is able to recognize letters that we can use to encode digits in different bases and it uses
0 through 9 and a through Z.
So we have the 10 digits 0 for 9 and we have 26 characters a through Z which means we have a total of
36 characters.
This is why the base is limited to 36.
So Python will understand that we're going to use 0 through Z to encode numbers in different bases but
it doesn't go beyond that.
If you want to go beyond base 36 you have to write your own algorithm.
So another example we can say you know what is 5:44 in base 8.
This is how we would create an integer with value 5:44 base 8.
And that would be 348 base 10 footprint the salt Python will print the base 10 version of that integer.
It's the same integer right.
5:44 base eight is equal to 3:48 base 10.
But when we print we get Basten same thing.
We can print a in base 11 there would be 10 in base 10.
Right.
So here a is that is a valid in base 11.
It would not be valid in base 10.
In fact B is not valid for base 11.
Remember the digits go from zero for nine then a through Z so 0 through a would be valid for base 11
but we would not be valid for base 11 and we'll get a value error.
So if you try and do something like that you will get an exception and the exception will be a value
error.
And the message will be something like this invalid literal for that integer with base 11 then it will
tell me what the literal is.
OK.
So now you may be asking yourself well can we reverse the process.
Can we go from a base 10.
And can we see what the representation of that number is in some different base.
And the answer of course is yes we can go both ways.
Now Python does provide built in functions to do that.
It provides us the bin function which stands for binary which is base 2.
So for example if we have been 10 it will return a string which will be the binary representation of
the base 10 number 10.
Now you'll notice it prefixes that string with 0 B.
That's just basically a way to document that the number contained in the string is a binary number.
It also provides us a function for octal base 8.
So if we do octave 10 we get 0 0 1 2 right so 10 base 10 is the same thing as 1 to base 8.
It also has the base 16 function so hexadecimal hex and hex of 10 would be 0 x 8.
Now these just document basically the base of the number if you would just to see the string 1 0 1 0.
You might not know maybe even if it was a number you don't know what base this is in this in base to
base 10.
Base 5.
Right.
So this zero be basically helps document these binary octal and hex numbers.
So you can use them in your string as well.
Right.
You don't have to just say end of a in base 16.
You can also say in 0 x of a in base 16 that will walk the same way.
No different.
And these prefixes that you see in the strings are consistent with how we can create literal integers
in different bases in Python without having to resort to the constructor.
So for binary octal and hexadecimal we actually have these prefixes that we can use in literals.
So for example we could say A equals zero b 1 0 1 0 no strings.
Right.
There isn't.
There are no strings.
So it is not a string.
And we didn't use the constructor we just did a literal integer.
It's just that it's of type binary.
So Python will understand that the number is 1 0 1 0 base 2 right.
So no strings attached there.
And so a will be 10 again.
That's the decimal or base 10 representation with a equals 0 or 1 2 while that's just 1 2 and base 8
which again is 10 and base 10 or 0 x 8.
And again the can be uppercase or lowercase that's not case sensitive.
We'll end up with again a equals ten in base 10.
So what about other bases.
Can we take a base 10 number and can we get its representation in other bases then base to base 8 and
base 16 that we saw with the built in functions.
And unfortunately you need custom code for that.
Python doesn't provide built in functions to do so.
Now I'm sure there are a ton of libraries out there that you can get that you know will do this.
These representations for us but let's actually do it ourselves.
It's a good exercise.
And it will also allow us to flex our muscles a little bit with the and Mada operators so suppose and
is a number in base 10 and B is the target base.
So we want to change N's representation from based 10 to base b.
Well what does that mean.
That means that we want to find a string of digits a string of you know base b digits that represent
that same number.
And remember in Bass's we have B to the 0 B to the one B the two etc..
So these are the slots and we just want to know what to fill in for each of those slots for that number.
And like 10 in base 10 was 1 0 1 0 and base 2.
So that's what we need to try and figure out.
I'm going to bring back that familiar equation that we've seen many times before and equals B times
and div B plus and must be the only thing is I'm going to rewrite it slightly.
I'm just going to bump B over to the right hand side of the div.
So any calls and div B times B plus and Mockbee and I'll use it in that format.
So it's no different.
It's the same equation but it's a little easier working that way.
So let's take a look at an example.
Let's say we want to convert or convert.
See that's the wrong expression.
Let's say we want to represent two 32 base ten in a different base.
We're not converting the numbers.
And that's something that people often say we're going to convert this number into a different base.
Technically we're not converting the number it's the same number.
We're giving it a different representation.
It's a different base.
And then we have an encoding that maps digits to possibly characters as well.
So it's a representation of the number we haven't converted the number it's still the same thing.
And at the end of the day it's always a binary number inside on computers.
So what we want to do is we want to find out what other digits that we have to put in these different
slots.
Right.
These are five to zero which is 1 5 to the one is five.
Twenty five hundred twenty five.
So we want to know 232 is what's in base five.
Well let's use that equation.
So let's start with 232.
That is 230 to five times five plus to 32 modifier.
Same equation as before.
So if we calculate that out we get that this is equal to 46 times five plus two.
Now I'm going to rewrite this slightly to make it more evident what's happening.
Forty six times five.
While five is the same thing as five to the one I'll put square brackets around it plus two.
Well two is the same thing as two times 1 and one is five to the 0.
Anything to the power of 0 is 1.
So in fact what we have is we've obtained the first digit right.
The rightmost digit of our number to 32 but in base 5.
And the second digit will be 46 right.
We have 46 fives and two ones but 46 is too big for base five.
Right.
That's that's too big we can't say the number is 46 to base five the highest digit we can have in base
5 is a 4.
So what we're going to do is we're going to take the same formula we have the same equation but we're
going to apply it to 46.
So we're going to apply it to the div to this first div over here.
That's number 46.
So when we do that we get this expression.
Forty six to five times five plus forty six month five times five to the one plus you know and the remaining
x terms in the expression so let's rewrite that slightly right.
This is the calculation first.
Nine times five plus one right.
Forty six the five is five is nine and forty six month five is one time five to the one.
So now we're going to multiply that out.
So we have nine times five times five plus nine times plus one times five.
So if we split that up we get nine times five times five which is nine times five squared plus one times
five plus the remaining expression.
And as you'll notice we now can right off base five number this way.
We have nine five squids.
We have one 5 and two units but again nine is too big for base five.
So.
Well let's do this again right.
We're going to keep going.
So nine to five times five plus nine mom five times five squared.
We calculate that out we get 1 times five plus four five times five square feet.
Expand that.
We get one time five cube plus four times five squared plus the remaining are terms of the expression.
So now if we have our number here in base 5 we have 1 4 1 2 and we're good.
Right one is OK.
One is a valid digit in base five.
So we could stop right here.
This is our number in base 5 to 32 base 10 is 1 4 1 2 and base 5.
But let's take a look at the pattern now.
So the first number here was the first man that we did right.
We took 230 to month five.
The second number here was the second mode which was the mud five of the first div right.
It was 230 to do five.
Modify this to 32 to 5 is 46 and then we took 46 Mont. 5 was the second mode here that gave us a 1.
The next one was the third model that we took.
So you can see we're just taking the model results and we using those digits.
The only thing is that this one here was our last do.
It's not a monster.
And we want to write an algorithm as simply as possible and it's OK we could do it this way we say OK
we'll just you know keep repeating the model until the divs value falls below the greatest digit allowed
for a base.
We could do that and we'll have to put some if statements you know we need loop and some if statements
in there.
But let's take a look at what happens if we go one step further and take that equation again.
But to the one so we have one did five times five plus one month five times five cube Plus the remaining
terms of the expression and we end up with zero times five to the four plus one times five to the three
etc..
So now our number is 1 4 1 2.
And each of those numbers each of those digits is being populated by Monde's.
So that's a little more consistent.
That's good.
And then this zero here in the div..
Well we can use that as a stop.
We could say hey if we reach a div of 0.
Stop stop processing.
We don't need to go any further with good right.
We're done.
So let's look at what the algorithm would look like to change the base.
So suppose N is our base 10 number let's assume it's a positive number.
We'll deal with negative numbers just now.
It's really not complicated.
We have to just take the sign out keep it and then we can put it back in later and we'll assume the
base is greater than equal to two.
If you want to work of negative bases there's lots of online articles that explains how to work with
negative bases and different ways to work with negative bases.
There are different algorithms and different approaches will stick to standard bases greater than we
call to 2.
So the algorithm Well if the base is less than 2 and is negative raise an exception.
We're not going to handle those.
If n is zero.
Well if the number is 0 it's always going to be zero.
No matter what the bases is right.
So we just return 0 we don't have to worry about it.
And we'll return our digits in a list.
So we're going to return you on that one for one too.
We saw in the previous example we'll return that as a list one comma for come one come at two.
So in this case I want to return a list that contains the single element 0 not just 0.
And here we build our list up.
So digits starts as an empty list.
And as long as and which is our number is greater than zero.
Well we do the following calculations.
We calculate the math which is and must be.
And then we calculate the div and store it back in N.
So it's an div B.
Right.
And then we're going to put them at the beginning of the list.
Remember we're building our list from right to left.
So remember from the previous example.
So we need to put and always in the first position of that list.
So we're going to insert em at the first position of the list digits and we're going to keep repeating
this until n right becomes 0 until that becomes zero.
And as long as it's non-zero we're going to take that marker and put it in the digits list at the front
and then we'll return digits and that's it.
That's that's the basic change algorithm.
Very simply.
So as an example if we take two three to 32 base 10 and base 5 we get it's representation and base 5
is 1 4 1 2.
That was the example we saw earlier.
Now if you look at base 16 let's say we look at 1 4 8 5 and base 16.
The digits will be 5 12 13.
Right.
These are the decimal the base 10 digits basically.
So that doesn't look like Hex to us right.
We would think of 12.
You know wouldn't be 12 it would be some letters right.
Is 10 and then B would be 11 and C would be 12 should be c and 13 should be D.
Right so we would think that 1 4 8 5 Bate's 16 should be 5 C D but that's a representation that's an
encoding.
So the algorithm is going to return a list of the digits in the specified base but we still have to
do the encoding.
So usually we want to encode things you know with letters like a through Z so we simply need to decide
what character we want to use for the various digits and the base of what character we want to use for
digit 12.
Wow.
May.
Maybe we want to use C but we don't have to use that.
Maybe we want to use an exclamation point or an emoji right.
Maybe we want all 12 to be a smiley face and 13 to be a frowny face.
That's fine.
That's just whatever you want as an encoding.
Traditionally we use a through Z.
So let's look at encodings.
So typically as I said we use 0 for nine and a through Z for digits that require you know that are higher
than base 10.
That requires more than just 10 digits 0 for 9 but we don't have to use letters.
We don't have to use the standard digits either.
We can use anything.
We just need a map between the digits and a number to a character of our choice a single character.
That way we're able to encode you know 10 11 12 things that are taking up two digits in base 10 into
a single digit so we could go the traditional route 0 0 9 for 9 and then 10 goes to a and then 36 goes
to Z.
Right.
So this gives us 36 encodings of 36 encoding maps right.
And hence this is limited to base 36.
Now we could refine that.
We could say okay we're going to use you know the capital letters the uppercase letters and the lower
case letters to have a different meaning.
So it's going to be case sensitive in which case we've got 26 more characters to work with.
So we have the 10 digits the lowercase 26 characters and the uppercase 26 characters.
So I would take us up to base 62.
My calculations are right now again.
You can do whatever map you want if you want to map zero to an A and one to B and you want to do that
and 10 you want to put in a pound sign 11 exclamation point whatever up to you.
Of course you need to make sure that we have was reading your numbers understands what your encoding
scheme is.
So I want to really make the distinction between changing the base of the number and encoding the sequence
of digits.
Those are two separate steps and you don't have to always do both.
So Python uses 0 for 9 and a through Z case insensitive.
And that's why it's limited to a base of less than a week to 36.
That's all it has for the encoding right.
So your choice of characters to represent the digits is your encoding map.
It's basically just a sequence of maps so let's take a look at how we can do this.
Now the simplest way is basically to create a single string with as many characters that you have in
your base where at least that many characters that you have in your base that will be used to represent
the ordinal position.
So if you use a string 0 through F then 0 will represent 0 9 will represent 9 A will represent 10 B
will represent 11 and so on and so forth.
So look at an example.
Let's say we have a base b We have a map that has to be at least of that one and we have all digits.
Then the way we're going to do our encoding we're basically going to take our first digit and we're
going to look up the character it corresponds to in the string.
So it's going to be map of digits of 0.
Right.
That's just index indexing sequences here.
So that's the approach we're going to take to do our encoding.
So let's take a look at a more concrete example.
So let's say we look at base 12 and therefore our map would be 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C right where
a would be 10 B would be 11 and C would be 12.
Let's say our digits are 4 11 3 and 12.
That was the sequence the list of digits that we got back from our previous algorithm then the coding
would be for B because 11 is B 3 3 is 3 and C would be because it's 12 12 corresponds to see.
Right.
So that would be our encoding.
So that's going to be the simplest way to create an encoding scheme.
So let's look at it.
So we have our digits.
We have our map.
We start with a string that's empty and encoding string.
And then we loop through all the digits in digits.
Right.
So for every d in digits we look up the character that corresponds to D.
Based on the ordinal position and we add that to our encoding string and we're running from left to
right now.
Right.
When we loop through digits we're going from left to right.
So remember what Plus equals means right.
A plus equals B just means take a plus b and then put it back into a.
Now this isn't a very efficient way of doing things because if you think back to our discussion on strings
those are immutable objects so we're not appending to encoding every time we run through the loop.
We're creating a new string every time we're creating.
We're saying take coding plus and concatenate onto it plus map d which is B that creates a new string
and then reassign it to encoding.
So every time we create a new string.
So not very efficient.
A better way of doing this which we'll see in later sections we're going to get into that and a lot
more detail would be to do something like this.
If you've seen that before that's great.
If you haven't don't worry about it we're going to study that and a lot of detail in some future videos
so we can use a list comprehension.
And we're going to take every day in our digits we're going to map it and then will join it into a single
string OK.
So again don't worry if you don't know what this means we'll cover it in much more detail.
I just want to point out that we know this would not be the preferred way of doing it.
You can for small numbers it really doesn't matter.
But this is a more efficient and you know probably a better way of looking at it as well it's better
looking code than having you know these three lines of code we can do that in one.
It's still very expressive.
It's very easy to understand what this is doing specially once we've studied it.
And so we'll cover that in detail.
Ok enough of this video.
And in the next video we'll really just skip into the code that we covered in the theory here.
So thanks for watching and I'll see you in a bit.